Title: Carla Demierre

----

Text: 

Transmitting messages and communicating with
those absent, tuning into a realm of invisible information, electrifying
cities to illuminate their interior lives : such were the obsessions of the 19 th
century, which discovered or invented the telephone, radio and telegraph
as well as the unconscious and spiritualism. The women of the age were
mental radios, receiving spectral and subliminal signals through portals
called “nerves”. The Fox sisters, Eva C., Leonora Piper, Eusapia Palladino,
Hélène Smith, Anna O., Blanche and Dora, heard voices and knocking,
and delivered messages from beyond. They were wild-eyed clairvoyants,
ventriloquists for ghosts, masters of illusion, whilst occasionally suff ering
from “melancholic delusions” in their everyday lives. Others would watch,
mesmerized, as the medium arched her body like an arc of electric
current and entered into a special sort of sleep. Hypnosis, sleepwalking,
catalepsy, trance are astounding – and photogenic – states of
consciousness. The rigid cataleptic is submerged in the state of a living
photograph. The camera merely serves to give material form to what the
eye desires to see. These states of consciousness can be easily triggered
with a tuning fork, smoke and mirrors, a scent, an electrical impulse,
pressure applied to a pressure point.

Hélène Smith prefers to hypnotize herself. It is not till the fourth seance
held by the medium, in January 1895, that psychologist Théodore Flournoy
tries to touch her hand, or rather prick it with a pin to elicit a reaction, only
to fi nd she feels absolutely nothing. Hélène is thirty-four when she meets
Flournoy. Two years before that she discovered spiritualism through a
friend, Madame Y., who took her to Madame Z. for some automatic writing
experiments with “eleven people seated around a large, heavy oaken dining
room table.” At the third seance Hélène sees an illuminated ball. Next time
around, long ribbons. Certain visions form unexpected loops in her
conscious memory. The hallucinated vision of a straw hat stays with her for
days aft er Flournoy fans her with his hat. When she snaps out of it, she asks,
“What time is it ?” The psychologist is there for most of Hélène’s trances
from 1894 to 1899. She takes notes on any automatisms she experiences
outside the seances and they discuss them. She is a rather tall beautiful
brunette with a deep gaze.

Her parents were “neither nervous nor psychopaths”. Her father was
Hungarian. Her mother practiced “table-tipping”, a type of seance much
in vogue in Europe at the time. We don’t know much about her childhood.
She grew up in Geneva. She was said to be fearful : “At night she shudders
at the slightest noise, the sound of furniture crackling.” In her normal
state, Hélène Smith was perceptive and slightly eccentric. Her everyday
automatisms were suffi ciently superfi cial and transitory as to go
unnoticed. What remained was a memory saturated with details and an
uncanny ability to fi nd lost items. She had always loved needlework :
“when your hands are occupied with mechanical movements and your
thoughts can roam freely.” Flournoy considered these reveries the
“prelude to her major somnambulatory novels” to come. She was employed
in a big draper’s shop. We know nothing about her love life. In her parents’
house she had a small sitting room decorated to her taste, with prints on the
walls, plants, flowers, “curiously framed” photographs,
a self-made lampshade and embroidered rugs. There was “something
original, bizarre and graceful” about the overall eff ect.

Just a few weeks aft er her introduction into spiritualist circles, Hélène
Smith began eliciting responses from the table, receiving messages through
automatic writing, hearing voices, progressing from her fi rst, rudimentary
hallucinations to complex visions that would become the subject of her
unusual novels. She became renowned for the diversity
of her automatisms. Her seances, conducted free of charge, were of an
unprecedented richness. She spoke in voices that were not her own.
Her writing was distorted according to her various incarnations. Unknown
characters showed up in her regular writing. Occasionally she spoke in

----

Captions: 